<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.w3.org/2002/06/xhtml2/ http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/SCHEMA/xhtml2.xsd" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<link href="Styles/Style01.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="Styles/Style00.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<style type="text/css">body{margin:1em;background-color:transparent!important;}#sbo-rt-content *{text-indent:0pt!important;}#sbo-rt-content .bq{margin-right:1em!important;}#sbo-rt-content *{word-wrap:break-word!important;word-break:break-word!important;}#sbo-rt-content table,#sbo-rt-content pre{overflow-x:unset!important;overflow:unset!important;overflow-y:unset!important;white-space:pre-wrap!important;}</style></head>
<body><div id="sbo-rt-content"><div class="colophon"><h1 class="title"><a id="copyright_page_orm"/></h1><div><h1 class="title"><a id="I_book_d1e1"/>flex &amp; bison</h1></div><div><div class="author"><h3 class="author"><span class="firstname">John Levine</span></h3></div></div><div class="editor"><h4>Editor</h4><h3 class="editor"><span class="firstname">Simon St. Laurent</span></h3></div><div><div class="revhistory"><table border="1" width="100%" summary="Revision history"><tr><th align="left" valign="top" colspan="2">Revision History</th></tr><tr class="revision"><td class="revdate">2009-08-04</td><td class="revremark">First release</td></tr><tr class="revision"><td class="revdate">2013-07-19</td><td class="revremark">Second release</td></tr></table></div></div><div><p class="copyright">Copyright © 2009 John Levine</p></div><div><div class="legalnotice" title="Legal Notice"><a id="id596135"/><p>O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or
      sales promotional use. Online editions are also available for most
      titles (<a class="ulink" href="http://my.safaribooksonline.com/?portal=oreilly">http://my.safaribooksonline.com</a>).
      For more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales
      department: (800) 998-9938 or
      <span class="email"><a class="email" href="mailto:corporate@oreilly.com">corporate@oreilly.com</a></span>.</p></div></div><div><div class="legalnotice" title="Legal Notice"><a id="id486646"/><p>Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly
      logo are registered trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc. The image of
      Nicobar pigeons and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly
      Media, Inc.</p><p>Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
      distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
      designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of
      a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in caps or initial
      caps.</p></div></div><div><div class="legalnotice" title="Legal Notice"><a id="id504463"/><p>While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this
      book, the publisher and authors assume no responsibility for errors or
      omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the information
      contained herein.</p></div></div><div class="publisher"><span class="publishername">O’Reilly Media<br/></span><div class="address"><p><span class="street">1005 Gravenstein Highway North</span></p><p><span class="city">Sebastopol</span>, <span class="state">CA</span> <span class="postcode">95472</span> </p></div></div><div class="timestamp"><p>2013-07-22T06:54:28-07:00</p></div><p/></div></div></body>
</html>