<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.w3.org/2002/06/xhtml2/ http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/SCHEMA/xhtml2.xsd" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<link href="Styles/Style01.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="Styles/Style00.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<style type="text/css">body{margin:1em;background-color:transparent!important;}#sbo-rt-content *{text-indent:0pt!important;}#sbo-rt-content .bq{margin-right:1em!important;}#sbo-rt-content *{word-wrap:break-word!important;word-break:break-word!important;}#sbo-rt-content table,#sbo-rt-content pre{overflow-x:unset!important;overflow:unset!important;overflow-y:unset!important;white-space:pre-wrap!important;}</style></head>
<body><div id="sbo-rt-content"><div class="glossary" title="Glossary"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title"><a id="I_glossary_d1e16124"/>Glossary</h1></div></div></div><dl><dt>action</dt><dd><p><a id="index-545D805CL1B" class="indexterm"/><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16135" class="indexterm"/>The C or C++ code associated with a flex pattern or a
        bison rule. When the pattern or rule matches an input sequence, the
        action code is executed.</p></dd><dt>alphabet</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16146" class="indexterm"/>A set of distinct symbols. For example, the ASCII
        character set is a collection of 128 different symbols. In a flex
        specification, the alphabet is the native character set of the
        computer. In a bison grammar, the alphabet is the set of tokens and
        nonterminals used in the grammar.</p></dd><dt>ambiguity</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16157" class="indexterm"/>An <span class="emphasis"><em>ambiguous</em></span> grammar is one with
        more than one rule or set of rules that match the same input. In a
        bison grammar, ambiguous rules cause shift/reduce or reduce/reduce
        conflicts. The parsing mechanism that bison normally uses cannot
        handle ambiguous grammars. The programmer can use <code class="literal">%prec</code> declarations and bison’s own internal
        rules to resolve conflicts when creating a parser, or the programmer
        can use a GLR parser, which can handle ambiguous grammars directly.</p></dd><dt>ASCII</dt><dd><p><span class="bold"><strong><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16177" class="indexterm"/>A</strong></span>merican <span class="bold"><strong>S</strong></span>tandard <span class="bold"><strong>C</strong></span>ode
        for <span class="bold"><strong>I</strong></span>nformation <span class="bold"><strong>I</strong></span>nterchange; a collection of 128 symbols
        representing the common symbols found in the American alphabet:
        lowercase and uppercase letters, digits, and punctuation, plus
        additional characters for formatting and control of data communication
        links. Most systems that run flex and bison use ASCII or extended
        8-bit codes in the ISO-8859 series that include ASCII as a
        subset.</p></dd><dt>bison</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16201" class="indexterm"/>A program that translates a dialect of BNF into LALR(1)
        or GLR parsers.</p></dd><dt>BNF</dt><dd><p><span class="bold"><strong>B</strong></span>ackus-<span class="bold"><strong>N</strong></span>aur <span class="bold"><strong>F</strong></span>orm;<a id="I_indexterm_d1e16221" class="indexterm"/> a method of representing context-free grammars. It is
        commonly used to specify formal grammars of programming languages. The
        input syntax of bison is a simplifed version of BNF.</p></dd><dt>compiler</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16232" class="indexterm"/>A program that translates a set of instructions (a
        <span class="emphasis"><em>program</em></span>) in one language into some other
        representation; typically, the output of a compiler is in the native
        binary language that can be run directly on a computer. Compare to
        <span class="emphasis"><em>interpreter</em></span>.</p></dd><dt>conflict</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16249" class="indexterm"/>An error within the bison grammar in which two (or more)
        parsing actions are possible when parsing the same input token. There
        are two types of conflicts: <span class="emphasis"><em>shift/reduce</em></span> and
        <span class="emphasis"><em>reduce/reduce</em></span>. (See also
        <span class="emphasis"><em>ambiguity</em></span>.)</p></dd><dt>context-free grammar</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16269" class="indexterm"/>A grammar in which each rule has a single symbol on the
        LHS; hence, one in which the RHS can match input regardless of what
        might precede or follow the material it matches. Also called a
        <span class="emphasis"><em>phrase structure grammar</em></span>. Context-sensitive
        grammars, containing rules with several symbols on the LHS, are not
        practical for parsing computer languages.</p></dd><dt>empty</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16283" class="indexterm"/>The special case of a string with zero symbols,
        sometimes written as a Greek epsilon. Bison rules can match the empty
        string, but flex patterns cannot.</p></dd><dt>finite automaton</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16295" class="indexterm"/>An abstract machine that consists of a finite number of
        instructions (or <span class="emphasis"><em>transitions</em></span>). Finite automata
        are useful in modeling many commonly occurring computer processes and
        have useful mathematical properties. Flex and bison create scanners
        and parsers based on finite automata.</p></dd><dt>flex</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16309" class="indexterm"/>A program for producing lexical analyzers, also known as
        <span class="emphasis"><em>scanners</em></span>, that match patterns defined by regular
        expressions to a character stream.</p></dd><dt>GLR</dt><dd><p><span class="bold"><strong>G</strong></span>eneralized <span class="bold"><strong>L</strong></span>eft to <span class="bold"><strong>R</strong></span>ight;<a id="I_indexterm_d1e16332" class="indexterm"/> a powerful parsing technique that bison can optionally
        use. Unlike LALR(1), it can parse grammars that are ambiguous or need
        indefinite lookahead by maintaining all possible parses in parallel of
        the input read so far.</p></dd><dt>grammar</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16343" class="indexterm"/>A set of <span class="emphasis"><em>rules</em></span> that together define
        a language.</p></dd><dt>input</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16357" class="indexterm"/>A stream of data read by a program. For instance, the
        input to a flex scanner is a sequence of bytes, while the input to a
        bison parser is a sequence of <span class="emphasis"><em>tokens</em></span>.</p></dd><dt>interpreter</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16371" class="indexterm"/>A program that reads instructions in a language (a
        <span class="emphasis"><em>program</em></span>) and decodes and acts on them one at a
        time. Compare to <span class="emphasis"><em>compiler</em></span>.</p></dd><dt>LALR(1)</dt><dd><p><span class="bold"><strong>L</strong></span>ook <span class="bold"><strong>A</strong></span>head <span class="bold"><strong>L</strong></span>eft to
        <span class="bold"><strong>R</strong></span>ight;<a id="I_indexterm_d1e16400" class="indexterm"/><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16405" class="indexterm"/> the parsing technique that bison normally uses. The (1)
        denotes that the lookahead is limited to a single token.</p></dd><dt>language</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16416" class="indexterm"/>Formally, a well-defined set of strings over some
        alphabet; informally, some set of instructions for describing tasks
        that can be executed by a computer.</p></dd><dt>left-hand side (LHS)</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16427" class="indexterm"/>The left-hand side or LHS of a bison
        <span class="emphasis"><em>rule</em></span> is the symbol that precedes the colon.
        During a parse, when the input matches the sequence of symbols on the
        RHS of the rule, that sequence is <span class="emphasis"><em>reduced</em></span> to the
        LHS symbol.</p></dd><dt>lex</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16444" class="indexterm"/>A program that produced lexical analyzers that match
        patterns defined by regular expressions to a character stream. Now
        superseded by flex, which is more reliable and more powerful.</p></dd><dt>lexical analyzer</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16455" class="indexterm"/>A program that converts a character stream into a token
        stream. Flex takes a description of individual tokens as regular
        expressions, divides the character stream into tokens, and determines
        the types and values of the tokens. For example, it might turn the
        character stream <code class="literal">a = 17;</code> into a
        token stream consisting of the name <code class="literal">a</code>, the operator <code class="literal">=</code>, the number <code class="literal">17</code>, and the single character token <code class="literal">;</code>. Also called a <span class="emphasis"><em>lexer</em></span>
        or <span class="emphasis"><em>scanner</em></span>.</p></dd><dt>lookahead</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16489" class="indexterm"/>Input read by a parser or scanner but not yet matched to
        a pattern or rule. Bison parsers have a single token of lookahead,
        while flex scanners can have indefinitely long lookahead.</p></dd><dt>nonterminal</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16500" class="indexterm"/>Symbols in a bison grammar that do not appear in the
        input but instead are defined by <span class="emphasis"><em>rules</em></span>. Contrast
        to <span class="emphasis"><em>tokenizing</em></span>.</p></dd><dt>parser stack</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16517" class="indexterm"/>In a bison parser, the symbols for partially matched
        rules are stored on an internal stack. Symbols are added to the stack
        when the parser <span class="emphasis"><em>shifts</em></span> and are removed when it
        <span class="emphasis"><em>reduces</em></span>.</p></dd><dt>parsing</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16534" class="indexterm"/>The process of taking a stream of
        <span class="emphasis"><em>tokens</em></span> and logically grouping them into
        <span class="emphasis"><em>statements</em></span> within some language.</p></dd><dt>pattern</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16551" class="indexterm"/>In a flex scanner, a <span class="emphasis"><em>regular
        expression</em></span> that the scanner matches against the
        input.</p></dd><dt>precedence</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16565" class="indexterm"/>The order in which some particular operation is
        performed; for example, when interpreting mathematical statements,
        multiplication and division are assigned higher precedence than
        addition and subtraction. Thus, the statement <code class="literal">3+4*5</code> is 23 as opposed to 35.</p></dd><dt>production</dt><dd><p>See <span class="emphasis"><em>rule</em></span>.</p></dd><dt>program</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16588" class="indexterm"/>A set of instructions that perform a certain defined
        task.</p></dd><dt>reduce</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16599" class="indexterm"/>In a bison parser, when the input matches the list of
        symbols on the RHS of a rule, the parser <span class="emphasis"><em>reduces</em></span>
        the rule by removing the RHS symbols from the <span class="emphasis"><em>parser
        stack</em></span> and replacing them with the LHS symbol.</p></dd><dt>reduce/reduce conflict</dt><dd><p>I<a id="I_indexterm_d1e16617" class="indexterm"/>n a bison grammar, the situation where two or more rules
        match the same string of tokens. Bison resolves the conflict by
        reducing the rule that occurs earlier in the grammar.</p></dd><dt>regular expression</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16628" class="indexterm"/>A language for specifying <span class="emphasis"><em>patterns</em></span>
        that match a sequence of characters. Regular expressions consist of
        normal characters, which match the same character in the input;
        character classes, which match any single character in the class; and
        other characters, which specify the way that parts of the expression
        are to be matched against the input.</p></dd><dt>right-hand side (RHS)</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16645" class="indexterm"/>The right-hand side or RHS of a bison
        <span class="emphasis"><em>rule</em></span> is the list of symbols that follow the
        colon. During a parse, when the input matches the sequence of symbols
        on the RHS of the rule, that sequence is <span class="emphasis"><em>reduced</em></span>
        to the LHS symbol.</p></dd><dt>rule</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16662" class="indexterm"/>In bison, <span class="emphasis"><em>rules</em></span> are the abstract
        description of the grammar. Bison rules are also called
        <span class="emphasis"><em>productions</em></span>. A rule is a single
        <span class="emphasis"><em>nonterminal</em></span> called the LHS, a colon, and a
        possibly empty set of symbols called the RHS. Whenever the input
        matches the RHS of a rule, the parser <span class="emphasis"><em>reduces</em></span> the
        rule.</p></dd><dt>semantic meaning</dt><dd><p>See <span class="emphasis"><em>value</em></span>.</p></dd><dt>shift</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16694" class="indexterm"/>A bison parser <span class="emphasis"><em>shifts</em></span> an input
        symbol, placing it onto the parser stack in expectation that the
        symbol will match one of the rules in the grammar.</p></dd><dt>shift/reduce conflict</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16708" class="indexterm"/>In a bison grammar, the situation where a symbol
        completes the RHS of one rule, which the parser needs to
        <span class="emphasis"><em>reduce</em></span>, and is an intermediate symbol in the RHS
        of other rules, for which the parser needs to
        <span class="emphasis"><em>shift</em></span> the symbol. Shift/reduce conflicts occur
        either because the grammar is ambiguous or because the parser would
        need to look more than one token ahead to decide whether to reduce the
        rule that the symbol completes. Bison resolves the conflict by doing
        the shift.</p></dd><dt>specification</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16725" class="indexterm"/>A flex <span class="emphasis"><em>specification</em></span> is a set of
        patterns to be matched against an input stream. Flex turns a
        specification into a scanner.</p></dd><dt>start</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16739" class="indexterm"/>The single symbol to which a bison parser reduces a
        valid input stream. Rules with the start symbol on the LHS are called
        <span class="emphasis"><em>start rules</em></span>.</p></dd><dt>start state</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16753" class="indexterm"/>In a flex specification, patterns can be tagged with
        start states. At any point one start state is active, and patterns
        tagged with that start state can match the input. In an exclusive
        start state, only tagged patterns can match, while in an inclusive
        state, untagged patterns can also match the input.</p></dd><dt>symbol</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16764" class="indexterm"/>In bison terminology, <span class="emphasis"><em>symbols</em></span> are
        either <span class="emphasis"><em>tokens</em></span> or
        <span class="emphasis"><em>nonterminals</em></span>. In the rules for the grammar, any
        name found on the right-hand side of a rule is always a symbol.</p><p>In bison terminology, <span class="emphasis"><em>tokens</em></span> or
        <span class="emphasis"><em>terminals</em></span> are the symbols provided to the parser
        by the scanner. Compare to a <span class="emphasis"><em>nonterminal</em></span>, which
        is defined within the parser.</p></dd><dt>symbol table</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16795" class="indexterm"/>A data structure containing information about names
        occurring in the input so that all references to the same name can be
        related to the same object.</p></dd><dt>tokenizing</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16806" class="indexterm"/>The process of converting a stream of characters into a
        stream of tokens is termed <span class="emphasis"><em>tokenizing</em></span>. A scanner
        tokenizes its input.</p></dd><dt>value</dt><dd><p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e16821" class="indexterm"/>Each <span class="emphasis"><em>token</em></span> in a bison grammar has
        both a <span class="emphasis"><em>syntactic</em></span> and a
        <span class="emphasis"><em>semantic</em></span> value; its semantic value is the actual
        data contents of the token. For instance, the syntactic type of a
        certain operation may be <code class="literal">INTEGER</code>,
        but its semantic value might be 3.</p></dd><dt>yacc</dt><dd><p><span class="bold"><strong>Y</strong></span>et <span class="bold"><strong>A</strong></span>nother <span class="bold"><strong>C</strong></span>ompiler <span class="bold"><strong>C</strong></span>ompiler;<a id="I_indexterm_d1e16856" class="indexterm"/> the predecessor to bison, a program that generates a
        parser from a list of rules in BNF-like format.<a id="I_indexterm_d1e16862" class="indexterm"/></p></dd></dl></div></div></body>
</html>